# Clojure eXchange 2016
In less then a month time I am traveling to London
for [Clojure eXchange 2016][exchange]. I am very excited about it! Not only
because I was selected to give a talk on solving permutation puzzles, a topic
that is very interesting to me. But mostly to be among peers, meet old friends
and make new ones, to have interesting discussions and learn new things.

A permutation puzzle is a single player game that has the following properties.
The game can be played by making a series of moves. For each state of the game
the moves are the same, and the object is to find a sequence that reached the
goal state. An example of a permutation puzzle is the [Rubiks Cube][cube]. The
cube that was immensely popular in the 80s, but still gathers up a crowd with
regional-, national- and world-championship.

Learning how to solve a cube takes some devoting. One has to learn an algorithm
that will tell you a sequence of moves to the goal. One can memorize an
algorithm, but the problem is that it does not help you when you encounter a
different permutation puzzle. Like the [skewb][] or the [megaminx][]. What I
would like to talk about is a way to discover the algorithms for yourself. And
how a computer and Clojure can help you in developing those algorithms.

But this is not why I am so excited on going to Clojure eXchange. The best thing
about Clojure eXchange is meeting other people. People with similar interests,
but different backgrounds, different ideas, different vantage points and
different insights. It is in interactions with these people I learn new things.
And I love learning.

So I hope to meet and greet you at the Clojure eXchange, because I love to learn
from you.

[exchange]: https://skillsmatter.com/conferences/7430-clojure-exchange-2016
[cube]: https://eu.rubiks.com/
[skewb]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Skewb
[megaminx]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Megaminx
